We must understand why Shinji is in pain

Curse of Eva
I believe that the Curse of Eva is a metaphorical representation of negative effects of a connection of child to mother.   An overly close bond will prevent them from growing up.  Thus, Asuka is forever trapped as a child.  We see her playing games and her interactions with Shinji are odd in that they still possess a child-like element that could be strange in a 28-year-old woman interacting with a 14-year-old boy.  Or perhaps there is more to this attitude that is to be explored.

The clones of Ayanami series
They appear to be a fragment of humanity as well as the divine.  Different historical cultures may have different views on Rei. They are tools that Gendo uses to achieve his desires.  The are the clearest illustrations of his sins.

Perversion of Gendo
Gendo has many parallels with Shinji.  He represents a twisted evil version of Shinji if he was to grow up without being able to connect with others anymore.  He has committed sins and atrocities without showing remorse.  We can presume that Yui had no idea that Gendo would commit these atrocities in her name (Ayanami Series and abandonment of Shinji).  Unit-01/Yui rejects Gendo at every turn in contrast to how she is always there to protect Shinji in NGE (Unit-01 Hand to protect Shinji from rubble).  
Gendo has no idea how to raise a child.  Gendo may feel that without Yui, Shinji can never be happy.  He may view himself as so much inferior to the brilliance of Yui and thus come to this conclusion.

Yui’s Rebuild
Events of Rebuild are Yui’s way of adjusting her original plans to correct for Gendo's failures as a human.  Gendo's failures and sins cause enormous damage to Shinji throughout the series and the consequences of those failures is that they never achieved a good ending from Yui’s perspective.  
Another point could be that Yui holds some responsibility for the betrayal of Gendo in not revealing the truth of her plans to Gendo and instead using him.  It is unclear who is responsible for the initial betrayal and perhaps it does not matter.  

Shinji’s suffering
My interpretation is that Gendo metaphorically passes his sins onto Shinji to bear.  Either this sin or Gendo’s abandonment and neglect of Shinji is the primary reason for Shinji’s pain and suffering from piloting the Evangelion.  
In this understanding then, it might be possible for Shinji to freely pilot the Eva in a world without Gendo’s sins.  However, the existence of Eva itself is cause of Yui leaving Gendo and the subsequent events.  Thus, the elimination of Eva can be the salvation of Shinji. Not because he is afraid of Evangelion anymore or that he wants to leave his current relationships, but rather that he realizes that Eva is the first and penultimate obstacle between a happy childhood with his mother and father.  Similarly, it could also be the obstacle in development of a healthy relationship with Asuka et al.  As we can recall from NGE, this desired to be loved and accepted by his parents is one of the central themes.
When Asuka criticizes Shinji for being a Mama’s boy it can be considered as a self-criticism of herself or her former self.  She too wishes to have had a happy childhood with her mother.  We can see this in EoE.

A new world
Experiencing the events of Village-03, Shinji recognizes that people can be happy wherever life can exist.  Thus, he wants to respect the fact that others can be happy even in a world of Eva.  Instead of resetting the world with his wish, he chooses to wish for a new world.   In ending, we see evidence that Shikinami Asuka and Wunder crew making it to the village and other hopeful signs such as Eva transforming back to human souls and raining down on the world. 
Choosing a life without Eva does not imply that Shinji’s choice is correct or best.  There is no correct choice.  However, because it is one that he has agonized over and chose then he will be able to accept the consequences.  

Death and Rebirth.
An interesting note is how Shinji always “dies” and is “reborn” in the series through Eva/LCL.  This parallels the Christian narrative that one must die to enter the heaven.  There are also other aspects of that which can be explored.  Some similarities could be explored in Asuka’s death and rebirth.

The Book of Life
•	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_Life
Kaworu names Shinji which suggests aspects of divinity.  If there is no book or life in the next world perhaps the cycle of looping worlds can be prevented.  Chicken or the egg causality dilemma as to why Shinji is special to Kaworu.  

Now, I think that we have covered the main gist of the story.  There are only some details that may make Evangelion a more colorful world.  There may be many different truths and layers to the story, but I think that you can already understand the ending.

But perhaps we can continue discussing for those who are still struggling to see the magic of the world because of their feelings of  betrayal...